
Did Jesus/Yeshua make a new covenant or renew a pre-existing covenant?

Table of Contents
Examining the Hebrew	1
Examining the Greek	2
Examining the context of Jeremiah 31:31-32	3
Examining Galatians 4:24	3
Examining Romans 7	3
The Law of the High Priest	4
Law of the Jealous Husband	4



Examining the Hebrew

What is the Hebrew word for ‘New’ and what is the Hebrew word for ‘Renew’? 

The Hebrew word חָדָשׁ  châdâsh (H2319) (khaw-dawsh') is the word used in Jeremiah 31:31 and which is translated consistently as ‘new’.   This is translated 48 times as “new”, 4 times as “new thing”, and “fresh” 1 time.

The Hebrew word חָדַשׁ châdash (H2318) (khaw-dash') is the word use for renew or repair.  

In the following verses, the Hebrew word H2319 is used:

Exodus 1:8 “Now there arose up a new [H2319] king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.
Leviticus 23:16 “… and ye shall offer a new [H2319] meat offering unto the LORD”
Deut 24:5 “When a man hath taken a new [H2319] wife…”
Joshua 9:13 “And these bottles of wine, which we filled, were new [H2319]…”
Isaiah 66:22 For as the new [H2319] heavens and the new [H2319] earth, … “
Jeremiah 31:22 “… for the LORD hath created a new [H2319] thing in the earth, …”
Jeremiah 31:31 “ .. That I will make a new [H2319] covenant with the house of Israel.. “

Changing this Hebrew word to renewed would drastically affect the scriptures above. For example, does a man take a renewed wife?  Did a renewed king rise up in Egypt?  Were the bottles/wineskins renewed or new?  Does one offer the LORD renewed meat offerings?

The Jewish translators of the LXX and the Apostolic writings use kainos for new, so next we will examine the Greek for cross reference.
Examining the Greek

The Greek word translated for new is Kainos and is Strongs G2536 and is translated as new 44 times and the same word is used in the LXX for Jeremiah 31:31.   See the following passages that have G2536 as examples:

Matthew 9:17 “… But they put new wine into new [G2536] bottles, and both are preserved”
Matthew 26:29 “ .. until that day when I drink it new [G2536] with you in my Father’s kingdom”
Matthew 27:60 “And laid it in his own new [G2536] tomb, …”
2 Cor 5:17 Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new [G2536] creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new [G2536].”
Hebrews 8:13 “ In that he said, A new [G2536] covenant, he hath made the first old.  Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away. “
Rev 21:1 “And I saw a new heaven and a new earth:  for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.
Rev 21:5 “ … I make all things new. … “

Changing kainos to renewed would mean the following:
1.	Jesus was buried in a “renewed” tomb rather than new as Luke attests.
2.	The wineskins were “renewed” rather than new which makes no sense
3.	Old things are passed away, but yet renewed?  
4.	You do not renew an object and state that it is old and vanishing at the same time. 
5.	Revelation and Isaiah declare a renewed heaven and a renewed earth?  Or new?

Additionally, there are variations to the word Kainos that actually mean renew/renewed.

1.	Renew:  anakainizo [G339] as in Hebrews 6:6 If they shall fall away, to renew the again…
2.	Renewed:  ananeoo [G364] as in Eph 4:23 And be renewed in the spirit of your mind;
3.	Renewed: anakainoo [G340] as in Col 3:10  and 2 Cor 4:16
4.	Renewing:  anakainosis [G341] as in Rom 12:2 and Titus 3:5

Notice the “ana’ at the beginning of the word.  The ana, denotes upward or change. Which is why ALL the words have it.  The word Neos and Kainos both mean “new”.  Neos is the word to use for relating new in time and kainos is used for new in quality.  But both can have a variation with ana in front to mean renew
 
Examining the context of Jeremiah 31:31-32

The language of Jeremiah 31:31-32 denotes a covenant that is not like the previous one.  Does this mean a new one or a renewing of a previous one?  

Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt: which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the LORD:

It states that God “will make” a covenant “not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers”. The use of I will make in contrast to what he made indicates that God “created” something new as opposed to renewing something that he made previously.

Additionally, God states that he ‘was’ an husband to them.  This is past tense.  The law states that a man cannot take back a wife.  So, God must find a way to make this possible.  Renewing the covenant at Mount Sinai will simply not work due to God’s own laws.
 
The language of Jeremiah 31:31-32 denotes two separate covenants.  A covenant that was made with their fathers and a covenant that will be made in the future.   By stating “not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers”, God intends to make a new covenant.  Also, a husband cannot take back a wife and renew their marriage covenant after she has been defiled according to the law.

Examining Galatians 4:24

Galatians 4:24 Which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar.

Here Paul points out that there are two covenants.   They are represented by Hagar (the flesh) and Sarah (the spirit/promise).  He points out that Hagar represents covenant from mount Sinai and Sarah represents the children of promise born after the spirit.  This second covenant is the covenant made by Christ at calvary.

Examining Romans 7

Romans 7:2 For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband so long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband

Here Paul explains that the woman is released from the covenant with her husband when the husband dies.  Israel was the bride at mount Sinai and Yeshua was the husband.  The only way to free the wife from the covenant that begets bondage is for Yeshua to die.  In order for this to happen, Yeshua must be manifest in the likeness of human flesh and then die to free Israel from the covenant made at Mount Sinai. 
The Law of the High Priest

Leviticus 21:14 A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these shall he [high priest] not take: but he [high priest] shall take a virgin of his own people to wife.

The high priest can only take to wife a virgin.  The high priest cannot renew a marriage covenant with a profane woman, divorced woman, or widow.

Jesus Christ as the high priest cannot renew a covenant with Israel because Israel has profaned themselves among the nations.  In order for Yeshua to get around this law, he created a new covenant that we enter by dying with him and being raised in newness of life.  Not renewing an old covenant which would be in violation of the law.

Law of the Jealous Husband

Numbers 5:27 And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, that, if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot: and the woman shall be a curse among her people.

Numbers 5:29 This is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another instead of her husband, and is defiled;

According to this law, Israel should have drunk the cup with the mixture in it because God is a jealous God and is jealous for his bride/people.  However, Yeshua drank this cup for his bride knowing that she was guilty.  As Yeshua hung on the cross his belly swelled and his thighs eventually gave way and he became the curse for his people.  So the husband drank the cup and died.  The guilty bride is now free.  Yeshua is resurrected in a new body and all who 

The Covenant instituted by Jesus/Yeshua is a new covenant.  
 
Hebrew words for new vs renew
Greek words for new vs renew

Sample verses for both Hebrew and Greek usage of “new” vs “renew”


English verb tenses

Tense	Example	Comment
Present progressive
	I am playing basketball now.	Denotes an action that is in the present time and ongoing.
Simple Past	I played basketball yesterday.	Denotes an action that occurred in the past and completed.
Past Progressive	I was playing basketball the whole evening.	
Present Perfect	I have just played basketball	Denotes an action that completed in the present. 


The perfect tense carries two ideas:  
1.	Completed actions, and
2.	Continuing results.
The action was completed at some time in the past, and the results continue up to the present


Strongs 341 anakainóō
 Means to “renew” and only occurs in 2 Cor 4:16 and Col 3:10

Strongs 2537 kainós
 Means new, fresh

Strongs 303 ana
  Denotes upwards 

Strongs 342 anakaínōsis
  Denotes renewal.









Hebrews 8:
1) Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; 2) A minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man. 3) For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. 4) For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law: 5) Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, See, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount. 6) But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.
7) For if that first covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second. 8) For finding fault with them, he saith, Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah: 9) Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. 10) For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people: 11) And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.  12) For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. 13) In that he saith, A new covenant, he hath made the first old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away.
Hebrews 9:

1) Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary.  2) For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called the sanctuary. 3) And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all; 4) Which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; 5) And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.


Transliteration and Language Rules

Let’s first examine the Greek word baptizo vs bapto.
 

Greek Names

Let’s analyze the claim that Jesus is JeZeus.  First we should look at the actually Greek for each word.

Jesus / Iésous (ee-ay-sooce’) / Ἰησοῦς

Zeus / Ζεύς (dzyooce)

Please notice that Zeus starts with Zeta, not Sigma.  Two different letters.  The words zit and sit for example, are two different words.  The one with a Z and the other with an S.  The English ‘S’ sound is the same as sigma and the English ‘Z’ sound is the same as Zeta.  

When you examine the languages, you will see why Yehoshua and Yeshua both transliterate to Iesus in Greek.

Covenants and Promises
What is the difference between a covenant and a promise?

Covenant:  A formal agreement between two or more parties where they agree to do or not do something

Promise:  An assurance that one [making the promise] will do or not do something or that something will happen.

Characteristics	Covenant	Promise
Definition	Agreement between two or more parties to do or not do something.	Assurance by one party that they will do or not do something or that something will happen
Roles	All parties have an active role	Only one party has an active role
Responsibilities	All parties have clear responsibilities	Only one party has an obligation
Legality	Has legal validity as it is a formal agreement	Does not have any legal validity (see below)
		

How can a promise have legal validity and strength?  When the party making the promise does so by making a covenant with one party and the agreed upon covenanted action is extended to yet another party.  For example:  Person A and Person B make a covenant that contains agreements and actions which pertain to Person C.  

•	Gen 15:8-18 Covenant God made with himself while Abram was in a deep sleep.
•	Heb 6:13 For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself,

Also, a will and testament are not a covenant with the inheritor, but rather a promise that has legal force upon the death of the testator.

•	Hebrews 9:16-17 For where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the testator [diatithemi]. For a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator [diatithemi] liveth.
•	Luke 22:29 And I appoint [diatithemi] unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed [diatithemi] unto me;

In the scriptures above, the words testator and appoint are from the Greek word diatithemi which means:  1) to arrange, dispose of, one’s own affairs, to dispose of by will, make a testament.  The word could also mean to make a covenant, or enter into a covenant.  Considering the context of the passage, we can see that the word is used with the meaning to arrange of one’s own affairs by a testament.

Consider the concept of a surety.  What is surety?  Surety is used in the scriptures to mean: One who has become legally liable for the debt, default, or failure in duty of another.

•	Gen 43:9 I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever:
•	Hebrews 7:22 By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament.

Who is Israel?

•	Exodus 3:22 And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD, Israel is my son, even my firstborn:
•	Psalm 89:27 Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth.
•	Hosea 11:1 When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt
•	Matthew 2:15 And was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.

In this section we will examine the scriptures to understand the person called Israel.








List scriptures

Sinai Covenant	New Covenant
	
	
	
	
	
	
	





Resources:
https://www.differencebetween.com/difference-between-covenant-and-vs-promise/

